SALT LAKE CITY — Craig Miller was recently rifling through some old Utah water documents destined to be destroyed when he came across a peculiar set of drawings of the Great Salt Lake sketched nearly 60 years ago.

The document, dated Jan. 15, 1965, outlined a series of dikes, highways and land reclamation projects by Farmington Bay for the ensuing 75 years in an effort to utilize surplus waters from the Bear, Jordan and Weber rivers — at least, that was their intention.

The plans baffled Miller, the hydrology and modeling section manager for the Utah Division of Water Resources.

"They thought the lake was going to dry up and they had to do something, but the something they (designed), oh my gosh, I'm glad they didn't do it," he said, recalling his initial reaction. "There would have been so many negative consequences from what they were attempting to do."

One particular idea, dumping fly ash near the bay, would have created an "environmental disaster" for a large freshwater lake in the area, he explained.

Miller thought he had seen it all when it came to the Great Salt Lake. He joined the division in the 1970s just in time to witness the lake's rising levels force a need to pump water out of the lake to avoid severe flooding. He's since seen the lake slowly dry into a completely different state, to the point where he's listened to ways to pump outside water into the lake.

This set of records, though, was something new. He found it particularly odd because, throughout his career, nobody ever talked about this plan at the water cooler or anywhere else, for that matter.

"I really don't know the history of what they were thinking back then," he said. "(It's) a mystery."

Flash forward to the lake today. The Great Salt Lake continues to make made global headlines because it has reached all-time record lows each of the past two years. Miller figures it will drop to about 4,188.9 feet this month before inflows begin helping the lake slowly rise again this fall and winter. That's 11.5 feet below the average lake elevation over the past 175 years.

Yet the previous record-low — prior to 2021 — didn't come at any other point during the West's two-decade-long megadrought. It actually occurred on Oct. 15, 1963, which likely inspired the plan that Miller serendipitously uncovered.

These designs ultimately say a lot about how knowledge of the Great Salt Lake and its importance to the region have changed over the past few decades. This also explains why there's a stronger reaction to dropping lake levels this time around.
